
1. Introduction to Exploratory Data Analysis
Yogi Berra said, "You can observe a lot by watching." The same is true with data. If you can appropriately display your data, you can already start to draw conclusions from it. I'll go even further. Exploring your data is a crucial step in your analysis.

2. Exploratory data analysis
When I say exploring your data, I mean organizing and plotting your data, and maybe computing a few numerical summaries about them. This idea is known as exploratory data analysis, or EDA, and was developed by one of the greatest statisticians of all time, John Tukey. He wrote a book entitled Exploratory Data Analysis in 1977 where he laid out the principles.

3. John Tukey
In that book, he said, "Exploratory data analysis can never be the whole story, but nothing else can serve as the foundation stone." I wholeheartedly agree with this, so we will begin our study of statistical thinking with EDA. Let's consider an example.

4. 2008 US swing state election results
Here, we have a data set I acquired from data dot gov containing the election results of 2008 at the county level in each of the three major swing states of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Florida. Those are the ones that largely decide recent elections in the US. This is how they look when I open the file with my text editor. They are a little prettier if we look at them with in a Pandas DataFrame,

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
5. 2008 US swing state election results
in this case only looking at the columns of immediate interest, the state, county, and share of the vote that went to Democrat Barack Obama. We could stare the these numbers, but I think you'll agree that it is pretty hopeless to gain any sort of understanding from doing this. Alternatively, we could charge in headlong and start defining and computing parameters and their confidence intervals, and do hypothesis tests. You will learn how to do all of these things in this course and its sequel. But a good field commander does not just charge into battle without first getting a feel for the terrain and sizing up the opposing army. So, like the field commander, we should explore the data first. In this chapter, we will discuss graphical exploratory data analysis. This involves taking data from tabular form, like we have here in the DataFrame,

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
6. 2008 US swing state election results
and representing it graphically. You are presenting the same information, but it is in a more human-interpretable form. For example, we take the Democratic share of the vote in the counties of all of the three swing states and plot them as a histogram. The height of each bar is the number of counties that had the given level of support for Obama. For example, the tallest bar is the number of counties that had between 40% and 50% of its votes cast for Obama. Right away, because there is more area in the histogram to the left of 50%, we can see that more counties voted for Obama's opponent, John McCain, than voted for Obama. Look at that. Just by making one plot, we could already draw a conclusion about the data, which would have been extraordinarily tedious by hand counting in the DataFrame.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
7. Let's practice!
Now let's review some of the basic ideas behind EDA with a couple exercises.




1. Plotting a histogram
We saw in the last video that a histogram can be a useful plot to generate when exploring a data set. Let's go over how we can create one.

2. 2008 US swing state election results
We are interested in the fraction of the vote that went to Barack Obama in each county. We can plot this as a histogram using

3. Generating a histogram
the matplotlib dot pyplot module's hist function. We pass it the dem_share column of the DataFrame. We could have also passed a NumPy array with the same data, and it works just fine. In fact, for this course and its sequel, you can use DataFrames and NumPy arrays interchangeably. Note that plt dot hist returns three arrays that I am not interested in; I only want the plot. I therefore assign a dummy variable called "underscore" to them, which is common practice in Python. After creating the histogram, we label the axes.

4. Always label your axes
Always label your axes, for histograms or any other kind of plot. Otherwise no one can know what it is you are plotting.

5. 2008 US swing state election results
You probably didn't notice, but this plot looks slightly different than the first plot I showed. You can see it if you look at them side-by-side.

6. Histograms with different binning
They are different because they have different binning. In the plot at left, we have ten bins that were automatically generated by the default settings of plt dot hist, and I set up the bins on the right myself.

7. Setting the bins of a histogram
I specified where the edges of the bars of the histogram are, the bin edges, and use the bins keyword argument to pass that to plt dot hist.

8. Setting the bins of a histogram
You can also specify a number of bins, say 20, using the bins keyword argument, and Matplotlib will automatically generate 20 evenly spaced bins. Now, the plots we've made so far are stylized with Matplotlib's default settings. I prefer to use the default settings

9. Seaborn
of Seaborn, an excellent matplotlib-based statistical data visualization package written primarily by Michael Waskom.

10. Setting Seaborn styling
We import it as sns, as is traditionally done. Upon import, we can set the style to be Seaborn's default, using the sns dot set function.

11. A Seaborn-styled histogram
This results in nicely formatted plots. Beyond this stylistic functionality, Seaborn offers useful plotting functions that we will explore in the next video.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
12. Let's practice!
Before we do that, let's practice making histograms with some exercises.




1. Plot all of your data: Bee swarm plots
The histogram of county-level election data was informative.

2. 2008 US swing state election results
We learned that more counties voted for McCain than for Obama. Since our goal is to learn from data, this is great! However, a major drawback of using histograms

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
3. 2008 US swing state election results
is that the same data set can look different depending on how the bins are chosen. And choice of bins is in many ways arbitrary. This leads to

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
4. Binning bias
binning bias; you might interpret your plot differently for two different choices of bin number. An additional problem with histograms is that we are not plotting all of the data. We are sweeping the data into bins, and losing their actual values.

5. Bee swarm plot
To remedy these problems we can make a bee swarm plot, also called a swarm plot. This is best shown by example. Here is a beeswarm plot of the vote totals in the three swing states. Each point in the plot represents the share of the vote Obama got in a single county. The position along the y-axis is the quantitative information. The data are spread in x to make them visible, but their precise location along the x-axis is unimportant. Notably, we no longer have any binning bias and all data are displayed. This plot may be conveniently generated using Seaborn.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
6. Organization of the data frame
A requirement is that your data are in a well-organized Pandas DataFrame

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
7. Organization of the data frame
where each column is a feature and

8. Organization of the data frame
each row an observation. In this case, an observation is a county, and the features are state and the Democratic share of the vote.

9. Generating a bee swarm plot
To make the plot, you need to specify which column gives the values for the y-axis, in this case the share of the vote that went to the Democrat Barack Obama, and the values for the x-axis, in this case the state. And of course, you need to tell it which DataFrame contains the data.

10. 2008 US swing state election results
From this plot, too, we can clearly see that Obama got less than 50% of the vote in the majority of counties in each of the three swing states. This time it is more detailed than a histogram, but without too much added visual complexity.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
11. Let's practice!
Now it's your turn to make some bee swarm plots!



1. Plot all of your data: ECDFs
We saw in the last video the clarity of bee swarm plots.

2. 2008 US swing state election results
However, there is a limit to their efficacy. For example, imagine we wanted to plot the county-level voting data for all states

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
3. 2008 US election results: East and West
east of the Mississippi River and all states west. We make the swarm plot as before, but using a DataFrame that contains all states, with each classified as being east or west of the Mississippi. The bee swarm plot has a real problem. The edges have overlapping data points, which was necessary in order to fit all points onto the plot. We are now obfuscating data. So, using a bee swarm plot here is not the best option. As an alternative,

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
4. Empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF)
we can compute an empirical cumulative distribution function, or ECDF. Again, this is best explained by example. Here is a picture of an ECDF of the percentage of swing state votes that went to Obama. A x-value of an ECDF is the quantity you are measuring, in this case the percent of vote that sent to Obama. The y-value is the fraction of data points that have a value smaller than the corresponding x-value.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
5. Empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF)
For example, 20% of counties in swing states had 36% or less of its people vote for Obama.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
6. Empirical cumulative distribution function (ECDF)
Similarly, 75% of counties in swing states had 50% or less of its people vote for Obama.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
7. Making an ECDF
Let's look at how to make one of these from our data. The x-axis is the sorted data. We need to generate it using the NumPy function sort, so we need to import Numpy, which we do using the alias np as is commonly done. The we can use np dot sort to generate our x-data. The y-axis is evenly spaced data points with a maximum of one, which we can generate using the np dot arange function and then dividing by the total number of data points. Once we specify the x and y values, we plot the points. By default, plt-dot-plot plots lines connecting the data points. To plot our ECDF, we just want points. To achieve this we pass the string period and the string 'none' to the keywords arguments marker and linestyle, respectively. As you remember from my forceful reminder in an earlier video, we label the axes. Finally, we use the plt dot margins function to make sure none of the data points run over the side of the plot area. Choosing a value of point-02 gives a 2% buffer all around the plot.

8. 2008 US swing state election ECDF
The result is the beautiful ECDF I just showed you. We can also easily plot multiple ECDFs on the same plot.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
9. 2008 US swing state election ECDFs
For example, here are the ECDFs for the three swing states. We see that Ohio and Pennsylvania were similar, with Pennsylvania having slightly more Democratic counties. Florida, on the other hand, had a greater fraction of heavily Republican counties. In my workflow, I almost always plot the ECDF first. It shows all the data and gives a complete picture of how the data are distributed.

1 Data retrieved from Data.gov (https://www.data.gov/)
10. Let's practice!
But don't take my word for how great ECDFs are. You can see for yourself in the exercises!




1. Onward toward the whole story!
You now have some great graphical EDA tools.

2. Insert title here...
You can quickly generate and investigate a histogram. You can immediately get a feel for your data by plotting all of them, with bee swarm plots or ECDFs. In almost every data set we encounter in this course, and in its sequel, and also in real life, we start with graphical EDA. Remember what Tukey said,

3. “Exploratory data analysis can never be the whole story, but nothing else can serve as the foundation stone.” — John Tukey
"Exploratory data analysis can never be the whole story, but nothing else can serve as the foundation stone."

4. Coming up…
In the next chapter, you will build upon graphical EDA with quantitative EDA, which allows you to compute useful summary statistics. With your foundation stone in place, you will spend the last half of this course learning to think probabilistically. You will learn about probability distributions for both discrete and continuous variables, which provide the mathematical foundation for you to draw meaningful conclusions from your data. We will not get mired in mathematical details, but rather will unleash the power of the NumPy random module to use hacker statistics in order to simulate the probabilistic stories and distributions that we encounter. You will find that by writing a few lines of Python code, you can perform even putatively complicated statistical analyses. As you work through this course and its sequel, you will grow ever closer to being able to tell what Tukey calls "the whole story."

5. Let's practice!
Now, let's get to work!

